# Bodies, Media, Systems Notes Log
**Last updated: February 7, 2021**

## Wolfe, Cary. *What is Posthumanism?*, Minnesota UP, 2010.

*"But the first lessons of both Derrida and Luhmann (and in this they go beyond Foucault's genealogical method and beyond the dialectical and historical accounts of the sort we find in Hayles) is that Enlightenment rationality is not, as it were, rational enough, because it stops short of applying its own protocols ands commitments to *itself*. This is, of course, the entire point of Derrida's deconstruction..." (p. xx)*

*"Systems theory...does not occlude, deny, or otherwise devalue difference but rather begins with difference--namely, the cornerstone postulate of the difference between system and environment, and the corollary assumption that the environment of any system is always already of overwhelmingly greater complexity than the system itself...Under pressure to adapt to a complex and changing environment, systems increase their selectivity--they make their filters more finely woven, if you like--by building up their own internal complexity by means of self-referential closure and the reentry of the system/environment distinction within the system itself within a process of internal differentiation...This self-referential closure, however, does not indicate solipsism, idealism, or isolation but is instead crucial to understanding a fundamental principle...of what I call 'openness from closure.'" (pp. 14-15)*

- Wolfe's analysis of systems theory gets at systems' tendencies to grow from closed systems to open systems back to larger closed systems as environmental complexities open up and are subsumed by the system that closes in on these broader territorial boundaries. This is beacuse of the indexical nature that systems demand and their inevitable external, environmental complexities that are not indexed until they become part of the system.

*"This is what Derrida had in mind (and more, as we are about to see) in his criticism of a 'biological continuism, whose sinister connotations we are well aware of,' one that ignores 'the abyssal rupture' between human and nonhuman life, but also* within *and* between *different forms of nonhuman and animal life* (p. 83)

*"Instead, Derrida insists that 'the modern possibility of the photograph joins, in a single system, death and the referent.' What he means by this rather enigmatic formulation is a kind of spectrality inheres in the technology of the image because of its fundamental iterability:
    'Because we know that, once it has been taken, captured, this image will be reproducible in our absence, because we know this* already, *we are already haunted     by this future, which brings our death"* (p. 92).
    
- Derrida sees mediation as a iterably system in which semiotic connection to referents which cannot be erased, not only despite its iterability, but **because** of it (remediation in Bolter and Grusin's language). For Derrida, through Wolfe's analysis, biometrics and their various interfaced manifestions of wearable, embeddable, ingestible, implantable will, of course, always point back to the referent subject, the body, despite it's potential growth and acceleration via big data practices (as discussed in Behar). But, is this true of other material mediations that are not measured, tracked, and traced (see Derrida's "trace"). Do hormonal media that externalize through my body and meet other bodies ("Toxic Sexes") always carry a referent of myself as subject? Do hormonal profiles that come from mares to develop synthetic HRT always carry the referent of the mutispecies with them ("Awash in Urine"). Ahi-King and Hayward, and Haraway argue that they do. Ecologies of "our" hormones are always mediating through the other's body and vice versa. In this trace of the referent, the production and mantainance (to use Stone's words) of the discursive subject is its potentional accumulation of hybridity beyond species boundary and beyond the boundaries of data-medium. This is not to argue that "biological continuism" links all species and all materialities together on the same political plane, clearly humans remain the dominant political producers and organizers in our anthropocentric ontoepistemological projects. Further, much of the hormonal sharing that goes on inter-species, and even intra-species has little known, if any, effect on other biological bodies with some major exceptions such as procreation and the examples cited above. However, this doesn't mean there is a rupture the **networked affect** between species and between nonhuman and animal life which can be materially traced.

## Pedersen, Isabel and Andrew Illiadis. *Embodied Computing: Wearables, Implantables, Embeddables, Ingestbles.* MIT Press, 2020.

**Pedersen, Isabel and Andrew Illiadis. "Introduction:Embodied Computing," pp. ix-xxxix.**

*"Just as people make demands on embodies computing technologies those same technologies make demands on people's bodies and the social norms around them...Embodied computing devices attempt to redefine people **as subjects** and as **data sources** in multiple spheres..."* (pp. xii-xiii, emphasis added).

- Pedersen and Illiadis emphasis on the demands of embodied computing and its ultimate role in subject-making are useful ideas for framing how embodies computing creates (or even outputs) disability and disorder when users' data distributions and disruptions are considered queer to the design of the system. This is largely because cultures of the quantified self rely on an understanding of the body as individually agentic and individually "optimizable."

*"Is it no longer sufficient to think of the body as a discrete, singular entity with distinct boundaries? Rather, should bodies be thought of in terms of levels, both corporeal and abstract, as data-blended entities that are susceptable to outside manipulation, surveillance, and control? In the past, bodies were assumed to be converging with technological advancements (Jenkins 2006; Haraway 1991), but should people consider them, in the face of large internet companies and governmental control, as data-blended bodies, **forcibly merged** with extended ambient environments..?"* (pp. xxii-xx-iii).

- I'm not sure what Pedersen and Illiadis mean by "levels" here. The body as a form lacking discrete boundaries (see Behar) is not a new idea, in fact it's a particularly poststructuralist idea and posthuman idea. Here it seems the authors are attempting to introduce some posthuman ontology to an issue that remains in the cultural realm of *transhumanism* which, as Wolfe points out, is still largely invested in Enlightment notions of the liberal individual subject. However, the authors' move to a more posthuman ontological position stops short of acknowledging the full scale of body-data-distribution and relations in the material world. For example, the authors do not address how human biodata is "forcibly merged" with biodata on local fish populations through hormonal pollution (See "Toxic Sexes"), breaking species boundaries and body boundaries to establish multispecies (Haraway).

**Pedersen, Isabel. "Will the Body Become a Platform? Body Networks, Datafied Bodies, and AI Futures," pp. 21-47.***

*"In earlier work, I contributed the term 'continuum of embodiment' as a cultural framework to explore the ideological justifications for technology hardware platforms that are increasingly embodied (Pedersen 2013). Framing the phenomenon as a continuum enabled me to write about how public, academic, journalistic, fictional, and commercialized discourses valorize prerelease personal technology on a continuum linking mobile to wearable to implantable innovations as a seemingly necessary, immenent, and determined future (Pedersen 2008, 2013). **I made the argument that this is a ruse that contributes to a constant mediatization of lifestyle**"* (p. 22).

- Curious to see how Pedersen uses mediatization as something, presumably different, than mediation as life is already mediated constantly. Her argument does not seem to address this.

*"Because body networks are proposed so that sensory data can be collected automatically from internally implanted sensors, they will be a core conduit for further body surveillance. But, unlike Smith, I do not see a 'bordered' body anymore. When a person ingests the surveillance device into her organs, the border disappears"* (p. 35).

- For Pedersen, the body only becomes an open system at the point of ingesting, embedding, implanting, etc (see Thacker). Furthermore, Pedersen's concern about the form of this system as a distinct body is determined by the politics of privacy, surveillance, and data commodification. While I agree that the body is not bordered, I do not think that this occurs only at the point of ingesting biosensing technology. Again, Pederson's understanding of the borderless fails to consider the many ways that bodies mediate and are mediated (see Kroker) as an already-open-system.

Thinking of the steady-state of the hormonal body as a closed system at a micro- or local-level fails to account for the sympoeitic growth of hormonal networks at the macro- or global-level. 


## Losh, Elizabeth and Jacqueline Wernimont. *Bodies of Information: Intersectional Feminism and Digital Humanities.* Minnesota UP, 2018.

**cárdenas, micha. "The Android Goddess Declaration: After Man(ifestos)," pp. 25-38.**

*"The UNSTOPPABLE project began by searching for materials for creating do-it-yourself bulletprood clothing. Internet searches on the topic led to internet forums from white supremacist and right-wing groups, which detail exactly which materials stop what caliber of bullet and where one can find those materials"* (p. 27).

- Pulling information or "knowledge" from white supremacist groups - put into conversation with the queerness of cis-male Silicon Valley "biohackers" using estrogen-blockers to reaffirm toxic masculinity.

*"Elsewhere, I have built on the assemblage model proposed by Jasbir Puar to develop an algorithmic model of analysis, and this example expands the notion of a tool to consider the algorithms the tool runs, or the uses to which it is put, its recipes or rituals of usage...by abstracting the concept of algorithms to include recipes and rituals. Additionally, this puts digital humanities scholars studying algorithms in dialogue with performance studies, which questions both the usage and the context of embodied gestures in making and communicating meaning"* (p. 29).

- Here cárdenas takes informatics (via algorithms) to the abstraction that Thacker's biomedia includes in his description and definition, but does not demonstrate in his examples. Recipes and performances of biomedia include day-to-day, non-discovery led but still generative, productions of bodies as rich in hormonal data. This is done through indexing meaning (defining parameters) and collapsing boundaries in biological systems. This is demonstrated by critical research-creation projects like Open-Source Estrogen, N(o)vum Organum, and by "biohacking" projects like Loop.

*"Elsewhere, I have built on the assemblage model proposed by Jasbir Puar to develop an algorithmic model of analysis, and this example expands the notion of a tool to consider the algorithms the tool runs, or the uses to which it is put, its recipes or rituals of usage...by abstracting the concept of algorithms to include recipes and rituals. Additionally, this puts digital humanities scholars studying algorithms in dialogue with performance studies, which questions both the usage and the context of embodied gestures in making and communicating meaning"* (p. 29).

*"Envrionmental scientists have made it evident that for life to continue on this planet, far more care must be directed to nonhuman entities such as trees, animals, and water"* (p. 30).

- Cárdenas' "Declaration" points to ecologies of vitalism. This ontological approach is necessary for understanding the affected bodies of networked endocrinology (in human and non-human agents).

**Coleman, Beth. "Domestic Disturbances: Precarity, Agency, Data," pp. 391-408.**

*"I am interested in a theory of data as the experiential, an X-reality of networked information as a real-time component of geolocated phenomena...Judith Butler describes a generative relation between data and society: "If the people are constituted through a complex interplay of performance, image, acoustics, and all the various technologies engages in those production, then 'media' is not just reporting who the people claim to be, but media has entered into the very definition of the people. It is the stuff of self-constitution, the site of hegemonic struggle over who 'we' are." In the formation of 'self-constitution,' Butler articulates a socio-techno subject, one reflected and self-fashioned (witness and action) of the event of mediation"* (p. 392).

- While I do think that the "complex interplay of performance, image, acoustics, and all the various technologies" does engags in production, I am more concerned with a production, or rather co-production, of an ecological constitution of networked systems biology--sympoeisis.

*"In a counter-reading of the graph, I am suggesting that there is also a mode of shadow data--information that does not appear as significant on the graph but may be inferred with significance based on a combination of online and located activist engagement. By interpreting positive and shadow data along these lines, one can argue that they mark the temporality of an internet meme (political or not) as well as the* ongoing *work on the ground by activists"* (p. 401).

- Shadow data, as interpreting the lulls, gives form to pattern/randomness where new values of inquiry are given to patterns typically considered the "negative space" of data. This is examplified in Loop which switches focus to the shadow data of blood glucose monitoring (see "Loop").

## Behar, Katherine. *Bigger Than You: Big Data and Obesity.* Punctum Books, 2016.

*"Plainly enough, data seems to be like plastic, the product of human labour--it is, after all...something very personal: an extension, I would contend, of the physical human body. Indeed arguments for data privacy rhetorically position data as* bodily *(deserving of the same protections from exploitation under capitalism that the body itself enjoys), rather than as a product of labour (which is fair game for capitalist exploitation)"* (p. 8).

- As Thacker understands the body-as-information in biomedia, Behar reminds us how information (specifically as data) is treated as rhetorically bodily, an extension of the self. However, this conception, as Behar points out, erroneously seperates data as a bodily extension from the bodily labour of data production.

*"So big data is at once confusingly close to us and our bodies, and always on the verge of becoming just junk, neither useful nor exchangeable, like plastic, a hoarder's embarrassment"* (p. 10-11).

*"Clough's gross inclusions lend unexpected credence to the counterintuitive confusion between data as an external object (product of labour) and data as included-in-subject (part of the labouring body). If affect is in matter, and an affective theory of value moves beyond the body-as-organism, we don't produce self. We aren't who or what or how we think we are. We are, it seems, much bigger, more materially diverse, and crowd-like"* (p. 28).

*"In my reading, a collective body-of-obesity/body-of-information models object-oriented feminist transhumanism and embodies decelerationist aesthetics. A transhuman body is capable of lateral agency, also described by Berlant as 'the forms of spreading pleasure...necessary to lubricate the body's movement through capitalized time's [efficiency] shortened circuit"* (p. 29).

Behar uses obesity to think through "bloated" bodies of information and their collective, but amorphic organization against the techno-efficiencies of accelerationist ideals. Here, Berlant's language of 'spreading' and 'lubricating' points to the oozing of bodies across form and relations system (open systems).

## Thacker, Eugene. *Biomedia.* Minnesota UP, 2004.

*"Whether it be the use of biological data in protein prediction [bioinformatics]...or the use of biological function for non-biological purposes [biocomputing], ..the emphasis is less on 'technology' as a tool, and more on the technical reconditioning of the 'biological.' It is this assumption, and the twofold logic that extends from it, that characterizes the concept of 'biomedia.' **Put briefly, 'biomedia' is an instance in which biological components and processes are technically recontextualized in ways that may be biological or nonbiological.** Biomedia are novel configurations of biologies and technologies that take us beyond th familiar tropes of technology-as-tool or the human-machine interface"* (pp. 5-6).

*"**The biological and the digital domains are no longer rendered ontologically distinct**, but instead are seen to inhere in each other; the biological 'informs' the digital, just as the digital 'corporealizes' the biological"* (p. 7).

*"...biomedia is based on a particular type of organization...it is not based on the technical metaphor of the 'interface,' in which parts identified according the substance are combined into some hybrid or cyborg-like form...the biological body never stops being biological..; it is precisely for that reason that the biological body is inextricably 'technological'"* (p. 14).


Thacker provides numerous, almost manifesto-like, definitions of what biomedia are (and are not). He tells us that biomedia are not hybridizations of the biological and the digital of cyborg-like transhumanist and extropian ideals. The biological body, which is not necessarily a human body, is already technological as a biological system. It can be encoded, recoded, and decoded. Thacker's definitions of biomedia are general enough that they do not necessarily refer to a mediation or encoding of the biological to the digital, or vice-versa. Nor, does biomedia refer distinctly to genomics and an understanding of DNA as "code." **This makes biomedia an appropriate organization of endocrinological (and exo!) phenomenology encoded and affected through various mediations. However, Thacker's examples inevitably return to bioinformatics and genomics.

*"There is, in biomedia,  a general devaluation of material substrates (the materiality of the medium) as being constitutive of patterns of relationships (or essential data). Although biomedia do take into account the role of material substrates, they exist, as we have seen, in the backdrop, as support for 'what the body can do' (or, more accurately, what patterns of relationships can do)"* (p. 28).

The materiality of the medium is not the essential approach of Thacker's biomedia. That is, Thacker's biomedia does not necessarily render patterns of relationships material, despite them always being biological. This becomes clear in Thacker's discussion of systems biology. I take this to mean that biomedia's focus is on indexing and encoding the biological-as-technical through biomedia as a system. This abstraction does not mean that biomedia are **immaterial**, but that they are organized through symbolic relations (**i.e., patterns of encoding, recoding, decoding**). Biomedia can thus exist in the realm of metaphor, surrealism, and speculation, despite Thacker's focus on extant technologies in genetic bioinformatics.

*"Systems biology has begun by addressing a technical question, but in the process has raised issues that are both technical-scientific and philosophical ethical. The characterization of the biomolecular body as 'inhuman; is not a moral description;* inhuman *does not necessarily imply* antihuman *or* nonethical. *It does, however suggest that a radically 'other' model of the body emerges from the predominantly technical orientations of systems biology, a model we have been calling the biomolecular body"* (p. 163)

*"**Systems theory is a conscious respons to the dominant paradigm of gene centrism in biotech.** In place of the emphasis on genes, it offers an emphasis on interactions between molecules. In place of the emphasis on things, it offers relations. In place of the emphasis on substance, it offers network and pathways of behavior...However in offering this alternative, it does not take into accound the larger philosphical issues it opens up, namely the incommensurability between the self and the network, between the body and system. **Curiously, it opens onto a nonhuman view of the biomolecular body, one fundamentally at odds with the subject-based, human view of genetic medicine"*** (pp. 173-4)

Again, it seems that Thacker's generalization of biomedia and systems theory is caught up in the specificity of genomic practices, despite his claim that "it offers an emphasis on the interactions between molecules" and not genes. Philosophical questions around genetics have trouble escaping post-Enlightenment ideals of the human as a liberal individual subject. DNA promises an encoding of individuality and there is little room for what might be seen as mutation through input/output (i/o) patterns of interaction with bodies in their environments (open-system Systems Biology). From an epigenetic perspective, unless networking longitudinal systems of genetic "vitality" (a term Thacker already rejects) through inheritance, genetics cannot seem to escape pointing back to the system-as-self. Endo/exocrine relations on the otherhand ooze and leak into their environments. Their encodings, recodings, and decodings occur in patterns of relations through multispecies.
