# Economies of Hormonal Disruption Log
**Last updated: February 17, 2021**

## Waldby, Catherine and Robert Mitchell. *Tissue Economies: Blood, Organs, and Cell Lines in Late Capitalism*, 2006.

*"Previous commentators have noted, but only in a cursory way, that the majority in the state supreme court discussed at some length the similarities between Moore's cells and human feces...This discourse focused on* valuable *human tissues, such as blood and organs, and linked the dissemination of these tissues to the smooth flow of information between management facilities (for example, hospitals and blood blanks); the absence of such information flows was purported to produce tissue waste in the form of expired blood and degraded organs"* (p. 90).

- In Moore's case, California's supreme court found that individuals held no property rights to the excised diseased tissue (i.e., "waste") used to create and commercialize infinite cell lines. However, this grants intellectual rights and property rights only to those who *have the ability* to turn "waste" tissue into something with use value and thereby, under neoliberal organization of medical systems, exchange value (commodity). The court's findings did not account for the labour of the patient in their production and housing of the tissues before surgical excision. I suggest that these patients are co-producers of these scientific findings and should be granted co-authorship on medical patents and papers. 

- I extend this concern to tissues taken from plants and animals. Here, the courts' judgements on "dignity" are no longer useful (see Wolfe). The question of dignity does not sufficiently get at the issue of labour. Instead, questions of sovereignty and sustainablity should inform tissue collection of all living organisms where "sovereignty" recognizes the organism's vitality and its role as labourer and co-producer. When collections transformations of living tissue are informed by the sovereignty of the organism from which the tissue was originally  produced, "dignity" should be a foregone conclusion.

*"In support of this claim [police do not have the right to seizure of feces] the Maryland Court of Appeals had concluded that just as people often assert 'ownership, dominion, or control' over body parts such as 'hair, fingernails, toenails, blood and organs,' so too ought one be able to exert these powers over 'excrememnt, fluid waste, [and] secretions...The court noted that human waste such as feces lacked the 'dignity of the human cell'...The court [Moore v. Cal] noted that human waste such as feces lacked the 'dignity of the human cell'"* (p. 93).

As neoliberalism is concerned with the ownership of matter by an individual or corporate entity, subjectivity is determined by property rights and intellectual rights. This is an erasure of the labour power needed to produce the cells in the first place -- the literal metabolism and conversion of energy by cells. Like my argument with "dignity," concerns of ownership cannot properly account for the networked labour involved in creating cells - both diseased cells and clinically "healthy" ones. That is, even those tissues considered "waste" tissues are co-produced. The very nature of 'excrememnt, fluid waste, [and] secretions' is that they are networked and co-produced beyond the flesh borders of the body.

*"Frow (1997), in his careful reading of Mauss, notes that in this traditional system of obligatory giving, recieving, and reciprocation, gifts act more like loans. They both **create and mediate** relationships between persons and continue to refer to the original owner, irrespective of circulation"* (p. 15, emphasis added)

- While Frow does point to ownership as a single referent and locus to tissue, the framing of tissue transfer as creation and mediation should be expanded beyond subject and ownership. As Frow points out, these tissues are agental and networked between persons, thus they their referents are multiple and as they create and mediate relationships between persons, these persons (regardless of legal "ownership" at any given time) are also creating and mediating the tissue.

*"This complicates considerably the relationship between national tissue economies and the globalization of tissue flows, as the pension funds designed to safeguard the welfare of an aging national body politc have effectively become the means for further disentangling particular tissues and samples from their national origins"* (p. 183)

- borderless tissues
